an exponential rise in alzheimer 's disease ( ad ) prevalence rates is predicted to parallel the aging of baby boomers creating a potentially unsustainable economic burden to the healthcare system .   delaying the onset or progression of ad , even modestly , by earlier pharmacological intervention could substantially reduce the economic and psychosocial impact of the illness [ 1 , 2 ] .   unfortunately 
 , many ad patients remain undiagnosed or go undetected until the later stages of disease . 
 insights into the underlying pathological mechanisms involving beta - amyloid plaque deposition within the brain have   led to the development of a host of antiamyloid agents   that are in various stages of clinical investigation . 
 there is now a scientific consensus that the pathological events in ad initiate decades before clinical symptoms become apparent , and if disease modification is realized in the coming decades , the need for improved methods of early detection prior to the overt clinical signs will be accentuated .   traditionally , neuropsychological measures , particularly those that tap cognitive abilities subsumed by the hippocampal formation such as episodic memory , have shown usefulness in identifying cognitively normal elders who subsequently develop ad [ 4 , 5 ] . 
 decrements in semantic memory and concept formation have been shown to occur nearly a decade before the development of ad . 
 performance on visual - spatial and verbal memory measures in midlife have also been shown to predict later memory loss . 
 however , individuals with very high premorbid intellectual abilities experiencing incipient cognitive decline may go undetected , and false positives are possible in individuals with a low level of intellectual abilities . also appropriate 
 interpretation of extensive neuropsychological testing requires a high degree of expertise and training , which limits its use in routine clinical settings .   the advancement of molecular imaging tracers that bind to amyloid , such as pittsburgh compound b ( pib ) or longer - lived probes ( e.g. , fddnp ) , offers a non - invasive in vivo method to detect and quantify brain amyloid deposition [ 8 , 9 ] .   however , this approach for presymptomatic detection is economically impractical for routine use given the current costs and restrictions on  medically necessary  use . 
 similarly , biomarkers including a142 and phosphorylated tau ( also implicated in ad pathology ) in cerebral spinal fluid ( csf ) can predict subsequent cognitive decline [ 10 , 11 ] , but lumbar puncture carries risks and is inconvenient for wide - scale use in cognitively impaired elderly subjects . 
 blood - based biomarkers have more practical applicability for routine use and are likely to be more cost effective than both csf and imaging procedures .   consequently , measurement of a140 and a142 in blood is increasingly being explored and shows potential in identifying individuals at the preclinical stage of ad [ 1214 ] . 
 it has been reported that csf a levels are subject to high diurnal fluctuations with extremely high variability reported over 12 hours .   over days and weeks , 
 furthermore , serum contains more a than plasma , possibly due to the release of bound a during the clotting process . 
 hence , serum a appears suitable for use in predicting mci / ad and optimal sensitivity , and specificity is probably achievable if combined with current diagnostic procedures , such as brief neuropsychological testing .    in this study 
 , we examined the usefulness of brief neuropsychological tests in combination with blood a140 and a142 as a predictive test for detecting mci / ad in at - risk older adults at a pre - symptomatic stage . 
 such an approach will be more practical for clinical use and be germane in designing large - scale prevention trials . 
 participants included a subset of subjects enrolled in the alzheimer 's disease anti - inflammatory prevention trial ( adapt ) . 
 adapt was a randomized , placebo - controlled , multicenter primary prevention trial sponsored by the national institute on aging . 
 subjects were randomly assigned to one of three groups : celecoxib ( 200  mg b.i.d . ) , naproxen sodium ( 220  mg b.i.d . ) , or placebo . 
 full details of data collection , measurements , and study procedures are available at http://www.jhucct.com/adapt/manall43.pdf and described elsewhere . the inclusion criteria for adapt subjects were age of 70 or older at enrollment , a self - reported family history of ad - like dementia , and normal cognitive performance on a brief battery of neuropsychological tests . 
 recruitment for adapt began in 2002 , and the study was completed in 2007 . 
 in 2005 , the roskamp institute initiated a proteomic ancillary study ( f. crawford , pi ) involving blood draw from these subjects . 
 the inclusion criteria for this ancillary study stipulated that each subject was an active adapt participant and had met all the adapt inclusion and exclusion criteria . 
 a separate consent was also obtained from each subject who participated in the ancillary study . 
 two hundred and fifteen subjects from the roskamp adapt cohort enrolled in the proteomic ancillary study .   at the time of blood draw 
 , subjects maintained cognitively normal status as determined by their performance on an annual cognitive assessment battery . 
 blood was collected during the semi - annual followup visits , and the cognitive assessments were performed at the baseline visit and at the annual visits . 
 the time from baseline cognitive testing to the diagnosis of mci / ad was 4.06 years ( 1.3 sd ) . 
 timeframe from baseline cognitive testing to blood draw was 2.25 years ( 0.71  sd ) and from blood draw to diagnosis was 1.79 years ( 1.2 sd ) . 
 the cognitive measures completed at baseline and annual followup included the modified mini - mental state examination ( 3ms ) ; the hopkins verbal learning test - revised ( hvlt - r ) ; digit span ( forward and backward ) from the wechsler adult intelligence scale - revised ( wais - r ) ; a generative verbal fluency test ( supermarket items ) ; the narratives from the rivermead behavioral memory test ( rbmt ) ; the brief visuospatial memory test - revised ( bvmt - r ) . 
 the mini - mental state examination ( mmse )   was extracted from 3ms . 
 alternate forms were utilized annually for the hvlt - r , rbmt , and bvmt - r on each subsequent annual visit . 
 subjects also completed the 30-item geriatric depression scale   and a self - rating scale of memory functions . 
 collateral respondents completed the dementia severity rating scale ( dsrs ) .   due to significant intercorrelations between these tests , analyses described below 
 are limited to those baseline cognitive tests that were sensitive to early changes ( i.e. , verbal learning and memory ) associated with mci / ad   or tests that were similar to those previously shown to be associated with a levels .   normative data from the cache county study was used to develop the standardized cut - off scores utilized in adapt . 
 individuals who scored below the cut scores on annual cognitive assessments underwent further dementia workup including physical and neurological examinations , laboratory studies ( i.e. , cbc , chemistry count , sedimentation rate , vitamin b12 and folic acid levels , thyroid test , and syphilis serological test ) , and neuroimaging ( i.e. , mri or ct ) , as applicable . 
 a more comprehensive neuropsychological assessment was also administered by a neuropsychologist as part of the dementia work - up . 
 this battery of tests consisted of the expanded consortium to establish a registry for alzheimer 's disease ( cerad ) battery ; logical memory i and ii of the wechsler memory scale - revised ; benton visual retention test   ( benton ) ; a generative fluency test ( animals ) ; control oral word association test ( cowat ; cfl ) ; the trail making test ; symbol digit modalities test ( smdt ) ; shipley vocabulary . 
 following completion of all components of the dementia work - up , a consensus team determined cognitive status using published diagnostic criteria . 
 the diagnosis of ad was made using nincds - adrda   and amnestic mild cognitive impairment ( mci ) using petersen criteria . 
 all mci patients were considered to be amnestic mci , as they only had memory impairment , but maintained normal activities of daily living and overall had a well - preserved cognition in other cognitive domains . 
 ample evidence indicates that amnestic mci patients may be in a transitional stage between normal aging and ad with 85% of these subjects converting to ad over a 7-year period . 
 additional evidence comes from an imaging study which demonstrated that the pattern of brain atrophy in amnestic mci patients is typical of that observed in ad patients . 
 it is then reasonable to combine these diagnoses in a single category , thus allowing a large enough numbers to supply statistical power . of the 215 subjects who gave blood for the ancillary study , two developed non - ad dementia , and 
 of the remaining subject pool of 208 used in these analyses , 28 subjects met criteria for either ad ( n = 10 ) or mci ( n = 18 ) in the two years following blood draw . 
 the serum a content was determined , as per manufacturer 's instructions , using the elisa kits for human a140 and a142 and the inter - assay cv , and the intraassay cv was reported to be 10% ( invitrogen , calif ) . 
 dna was extracted from whole blood for apoe genotyping using pure gene kits ( gentra systems , calif ) , and apoe genotyping was performed using previously established methods , as described elsewhere . 
 apoe genotypes were unavailable for 4 individuals , but these were included in the analyses . 
 the data set was range checked , and prior to analyses , the dependent and independent variables were examined for missing data , outliers , and violations of the normalcy assumption . ... (truncated)
